Spec: clarify Avro encoding for day partition transform in manifests (#16446)
apache/iceberg: format/spec.md

| **`truncate[W]`** | Value truncated to width `W` (see below)                     | `int`, `long`, `decimal`, `string`, `binary`                                                              | Source type |
| **`year`**        | Extract a date or timestamp year, as years from 1970         | `date`, `timestamp`, `timestamptz`, `timestamp_ns`, `timestamptz_ns`                                      | `int`       |
| **`month`**       | Extract a date or timestamp month, as months from 1970-01-01 | `date`, `timestamp`, `timestamptz`, `timestamp_ns`, `timestamptz_ns`                                      | `int`       |

> | **`day`**         | Extract a date or timestamp day, as days from 1970-01-01     | `date`, `timestamp`, `timestamptz`, `timestamp_ns`, `timestamptz_ns`                                      | `int` [1]   |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **`day`**         | Extract a date or timestamp day, as days from 1970-01-01     | `date`, `timestamp`, `timestamptz`, `timestamp_ns`, `timestamptz_ns`                                      | `date`   |
```

I think having the `int` conflicts with the Avro types table below: https://github.com/apache/iceberg/blob/main/format/spec.md#avro

If we decide to keep the partition Tuple in V4, then we would also add the `date` logical type annotation in Parquet: https://github.com/apache/iceberg/blob/main/format/spec.md#parquet I think this would be the most consistent.

This would effectively revert it back to `date` which it was before: https://github.com/apache/iceberg/issues/10616#issuecomment-2200191427

Author: i would still keep annotation here, this note bring quite some usefull context.

Author: Update: applied your suggestion, the row now reads \`date\` and the note has been simplified

| **`hour`**        | Extract a timestamp hour, as hours from 1970-01-01 00:00:00  | `timestamp`, `timestamptz`, `timestamp_ns`, `timestamptz_ns`                                              | `int`       |
| **`void`**        | Always produces `null`                                       | Any                                                                                                       | Source type or `int` |

All transforms must return `null` for a `null` input value.

> Notes:

Reviewer 2: Minor: I would prefer notes either directly after the table or at the end of the section (preferred). Right now, notes are between two normal paragraphs and that seems unintended.

Author: Moved

> 1. The result type for `day` has been documented as both `int` and `date` in earlier revisions of this spec. The physical representation has always been a 4-byte integer counting days from `1970-01-01`, regardless of whether the Avro field is annotated with `logicalType: date`. Readers may encounter manifests in either form; per the Avro specification, unrecognized logical type annotations are ignored, so the bytes on disk are identical.

Reviewer 3: > per the Avro specification, unrecognized logical type annotations are ignored, so the bytes on disk are identical.

Small nit, but I don't think this really captures the problem with the different types?  I think all Iceberg compatible readers by definition must recognize `logicalType: date`. IIUC the issue is that iceberg hasn't defined the promotion in either direction between `int` and `date`.  If we are deferring to the Avro specification [type resolution](https://avro.apache.org/docs/1.11.1/specification/#schema-resolution) might be the more applicable section (since it doesn't seem to consider logical types, I'm not clear if this is intentional, an oversight. One could construe this about only talking about physical type or that the types are not equal, and we are defining here an type-promotion or reconciliation specific to iceberg.).

Reviewer 3: Or we can just simplify and not refer to the Avro specification at all.

Author: Good catch, agreed. 

Dropped the Avro-spec reference in the latest revision. The note now just states the physical representation and the writer/reader contract directly, without leaning on "Avro ignores unknown annotations" framing.

Re your deeper point on Iceberg not having defined `int ↔ date` promotion: I think that's a separate spec gap worth its own issue rather than expanding this PR. Happy to open one as a follow-up if you agree it's worth tracking.

Reviewer 3: Int to date promotion would be a real spec change.  I think this more focused change makes sense.  I'm not actually sure int to date promotion is something we want to add generally.

> 1. The result type for `day` has been documented as both `int` and `date` in earlier revisions of this spec. The physical representation has always been a 4-byte integer counting days from `1970-01-01`, regardless of whether the Avro field is annotated with `logicalType: date`. Readers may encounter manifests in either form; per the Avro specification, unrecognized logical type annotations are ignored, so the bytes on disk are identical.

Reviewer 2: I don't agree with the conclusion "so the bytes on disk are identical". That's true, but not a result of the Avro spec's requirement. How about "Writers have produced fields with the `logicalType: date` annotation because Avro requires that readers must ignore unknown logical types. The bytes on disk are identical so readers must accept both forms and can choose how to pass on the data."

Reviewer 4: +1 to this wording

Reviewer 5: Could we break this down into just two sentences? I'd rather we try to avoid keeping the decision making out of the spec imho

```The physical representation is a 4-byte integer counting days from `1970-01-01. Writers may produce Avro fields annotated both with and without a logical 'date' annotation and readers must accept both forms.```

I'm fine with everything as is as well I just think we don't need to include the history here.

Author: Went with @RussellSpitzer's shorter variant below since it's a subset of @rdblue's covers bytes-identical + writer/reader contract without the Avro-spec rationale that @emkornfield pushed back on. 

Let me know if you'd prefer the longer form with the "writers have produced... because Avro requires..." framing; happy to swap.

| **`month`**       | Extract a date or timestamp month, as months from 1970-01-01 | `date`, `timestamp`, `timestamptz`, `timestamp_ns`, `timestamptz_ns`                                      | `int`       |
| **`day`**         | Extract a date or timestamp day, as days from 1970-01-01     | `date`, `timestamp`, `timestamptz`, `timestamp_ns`, `timestamptz_ns`                                      | `date` [1]  |
| **`hour`**        | Extract a timestamp hour, as hours from 1970-01-01 00:00:00  | `timestamp`, `timestamptz`, `timestamp_ns`, `timestamptz_ns`                                              | `int`       |
| **`void`**        | Always produces `null`                                       | Any                                                                                                       | Source type or `int` |

All transforms must return `null` for a `null` input value.

The `void` transform may be used to replace the transform in an existing partition field so that the field is effectively dropped in v1 tables. See partition evolution below.

Notes:

> 1. The physical representation is a 4-byte integer counting days from `1970-01-01`. Writers may produce Avro fields annotated both with and without a logical `date` annotation, and readers must accept both forms.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
1. Readers must also accept `int` values for the `day` transform, interpreting each integer as a date represented by the number of days since `1970-01-01`.
```

nit: could we keep this "Partition Transforms" section from mentioning file format specifics?

Reviewer 6: And move the Avro specific wording to https://iceberg.apache.org/spec/#avro
something like

```
#### Manifest Partition Field Encoding

Manifest files store partition values in the `partition` tuple.

For partition fields produced by the `day` transform, the Avro field may be
encoded either as `"int"` or as `{ "type": "int", "logicalType": "date" }`.

Readers must accept both forms. Writers should encode `day` partition fields as
`{ "type": "int", "logicalType": "date" }`.
```

Reviewer: Isn't this covered by the [Avro spec](https://avro.apache.org/docs/1.11.1/specification/#logical-types) as @rdblue already mentioned:

> Language implementations may choose to represent logical types with an appropriate native type, although this is not required.

I think we should avoid adding notes unless strickly required to aid readability of the spec.

Reviewer 6: then maybe we dont need the avro section. 

> Readers must also accept `int` values for the `day` transform

These are Iceberg types, which maps to avro int and avro date respectively. So its implied that avro reader should read both and avro writer should write date

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
1. Readers must also accept `int` values for the `day` transform, interpreting each integer as a `date` represented by the number of days since `1970-01-01`.
```

How about this? I think this keeps the note format-neutral and avoids over-explaining Avro mapping. Since this is in the Partition Transforms section, the referenced types are implied to be Iceberg types.
